Add Apollo Federation guide (#440)
strawberry-graphql/strawberry: docs/guides/federation.md

The last thing we need to do is to define a `Query` type, even if our service
only has one type that is not used directly in any GraphQL query. This is
because any GraphQL server requires the Query type to be defined.

In addition to that we also need to let Strawberry know about our Book and
Review types. Since they are not being used anywhere, Strawberry won't be able
to find them by default.

```python
@strawberry.type
class Query:
    _service: Optional[str]

schema = strawberry.federation.Schema(query=Query, types=[Book, Review])
```

## The gateway

Now we have our services up and running, we need to configure a gateway to
consume our services. Apollo Gateway is the official gateway server for Apollo
Federation. Here's an example on how to configure the gateway:

```js
const { ApolloServer } = require("apollo-server");
const { ApolloGateway } = require("@apollo/gateway");

const gateway = new ApolloGateway({
  serviceList: [
    { name: "books", url: "http://localhost:8000" },
    { name: "reviews", url: "http://localhost:8080" },
  ],
});

const server = new ApolloServer({ gateway });

server.listen().then(({ url }) => {
  console.log(`🚀 Server ready at ${url}`);
});
```

> [1]: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation "hApollo Federation Introduction"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[1]: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/federation "Apollo Federation Introduction"
```

title: Federation
---

# Apollo Federation Guide

Strawberry supports [Apollo Federation][1] out of the box, that means that you
can create services using Strawberry and federate them via Apollo Gateway.

> _NOTE_: we don’t have a gateway server, you’d need to always use the Apollo
> Gateway for this.

> Apollo Federation allows to combine multiple GraphQL APIs into one. This can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apollo Federation allows you to combine multiple GraphQL APIs into one. This can be
```

> extremely useful when working with micro-services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
extremely useful when working with a service oriented architecture.
```

## Federated schema example

> Let’s look at an example on how to implement Apollo Federation using Strawberry,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s look at an example on how to implement Apollo Federation using Strawberry.
```

> We’ll have an application with two federated services.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's assume we have an application with two services that both expose a GraphQL API:
```

> 1. book: a service with all the books we have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `book`: a service to manage all the books we have
```

> 2. reviews: a service with book reviews.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. `reviews`: a service to manage book reviews
```

> ### Books service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Books service

Our `book` service might look something like this:
```

```python
@strawberry.federation.type(keys=["id"])
class Book:
    id: strawberry.ID
    title: str

def get_all_books() -> List[Book]:
    return [Book(id=1, title="The Dark Tower")]

@strawberry.type
class Query:
    all_books: List[Book] = strawberry.field(resolver=get_all_books)

schema = strawberry.federation.Schema(query=Query)
```

> We defined two types, `Book` and `Query`, `Query` has only one field that allows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We defined two types: `Book` and `Query`, where `Query` has only one field that allows us
```

to fetch all the books.

> Meanwhile `Book` used the `strawberry.federation.type` decorator, as opposed to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that the `Book` type used the `strawberry.federation.type` decorator, as opposed to
```

> the normal `strawberry.type`, this new decorator extend the base one and allows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the normal `strawberry.type`, this new decorator extends the base one and allows us
```

> to define federation specific attributes to the type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to define federation specific attributes on the type.
```

In this case we are telling federation that the key to uniquely identify a book
is the `id` field.

> Federation keys can be thought primary keys. They are used by the gateway to

> > query types between multiple services and then joining them into the augmented

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> query types between multiple services and then join them into the augmented
```

> type.

### Reviews service

> Let’s look at how our review service looks like, we want to define a type for a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let’s look at how our review service looks like: we want to define a type for a
```

> review but also extend the book to have a list of review.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
review but also extend the book to have a list of reviews.
```

```python
@strawberry.type
class Review:
    body: str

> def get_reviews() -> List[Review]:

Reviewer 2: I think this function should do something with the current book id to make it clearer that it's dependant on the current book.

    return [Review(body="This is a review")]

@strawberry.federation.type(extend=True, keys=["id"])
class Book:
    id: strawberry.ID = strawberry.federation.field(external=True)
    reviews: List[Review] = strawberry.field(resolver=get_reviews)

    @classmethod
    def resolve_reference(cls, id: strawberry.ID):
        return Book(id)
```

Now things are looking more interesting, the `Review` type is a GraphQL type
that holds the content of the review.

Meanwhile we are able to extend the `Book` type by using
`strawberry.federation.type` again and passing `extend=True` as a parameter.
This tells federation that we are extending an already existing type.

We are also declaring two fields on `Book`, one is the `id` which is marked as
external with `strawberry.federation.field(external=True)`, this tells
federation that this field is not available in this service, and **that** it
comes from another service.

The other field is `reviews` which results in a list of `Reviews` for this book.

> Finally we also have a class method called `resolve_reference` that allows us to

Reviewer 2: It's bit hard to understand what the `resolve_references` is doing here. What might help is to add  another field to the Book type that gets set in the resolve_references function? Something like a `review_count` field?

Author: done! let me know what you think :)

Reviewer 2: It's a shame it's so contrived but I think it does the job of showing the purpose of the function 👍

> resolve references to types. The `resolve_reference` method is called when a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instantiate types when they are referred to from other services. The `resolve_reference` method is called when a
```

> GraphQL operation references an entities across multiple services. For example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GraphQL operation references an entity across multiple services. For example
```

when doing this query:

```graphql
{
  # query defined in the books service
  books {
    title
    # field defined in the reviews service
    reviews {
      body
    }
  }
}
```

The `resolve_reference` method is called with the `id` of the book for each book
returned by the books service. The `id` is the field that has been defined as
the key for the `Book` type. In our example we don't need to fetch additional
data for the book so we create an instance of the Book type and return it.

If we added more fields to book in a database this would be the place where we
could query our database for the additional fields.

The last thing we need to do is to define a `Query` type, even if our service
only has one type that is not used directly in any GraphQL query. This is

> because any GraphQL server requires the Query type to be defined.

Reviewer 2: Side note but I reckon it might be a good idea to remove this requirement because it feels kind of arbitrary and can be annoying when testing things like mutations. We can do it by removing the graphql-core schema validation rule.

Author: I think this might part of the spec :)

Reviewer 2: Hmm you're right. That's a pain...

API:

1. `book`: a service to manage all the books we have
2. `reviews`: a service to manage book reviews

### Books service

Our `book` service might look something like this:

```python
@strawberry.federation.type(keys=["id"])
class Book:
    id: strawberry.ID
    title: str

def get_all_books() -> List[Book]:
    return [Book(id=1, title="The Dark Tower")]

@strawberry.type
class Query:
    all_books: List[Book] = strawberry.field(resolver=get_all_books)

schema = strawberry.federation.Schema(query=Query)
```

We defined two types: `Book` and `Query`, where `Query` has only one field that
allows us to fetch all the books.

Notice that the `Book` type used the `strawberry.federation.type` decorator, as
opposed to the normal `strawberry.type`, this new decorator extends the base one
and allows us to define federation specific attributes on the type.

In this case we are telling federation that the key to uniquely identify a book
is the `id` field.

> Federation keys can be thought primary keys. They are used by the gateway to
> query types between multiple services and then join them into the augmented
> type.

### Reviews service

> Let’s look at how our review service looks like: we want to define a type for a
> review but also extend the book to have a list of reviews.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, let’s take a look at our review service: we want to define a type for a
review but also extend the `Book` type to have a list of reviews.
```

```python
@strawberry.type
class Review:
    body: str

def get_reviews(book: "Book") -> List[Review]:
    return [
      Review(body=f"This is review number {index} for {book.id}")
      for index in range(book.reviews_count)
    ]

@strawberry.federation.type(extend=True, keys=["id"])
class Book:
    id: strawberry.ID = strawberry.federation.field(external=True)
    reviews_count: int
    reviews: List[Review] = strawberry.field(resolver=get_reviews)

    @classmethod
    def resolve_reference(cls, id: strawberry.ID):

>         return Book(id, reviews_count=3)

Reviewer 4: What do you think about adding a comment here with the same idea expressed below as

>If we added more fields to book in a database this would be the place where we
>could query our database for the additional fields.

I'm thinking something like 
```diff
+ # Here would be the place to fetch additional book info by its `id`. 
+ # Perhaps from a database or another service.
return Book(id, reviews_count=3)
```

```

> Now things are looking more interesting, the `Review` type is a GraphQL type
> that holds the content of the review.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now things are looking more interesting; the `Review` type is a GraphQL type
that holds the contents of the review.
```

> Meanwhile we are able to extend the `Book` type by using
> `strawberry.federation.type` again and passing `extend=True` as a parameter.
> This tells federation that we are extending an already existing type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We've also been able to extend the `Book` type by using again
`strawberry.federation.type`, this time passing `extend=True` as an argument.
This is important because we need to tell federation that we are extending a
type that already exists, not creating a new one.
```

> We are also declaring three fields on `Book`, one is the `id` which is marked as
> external with `strawberry.federation.field(external=True)`, this tells

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have also declared three fields on `Book`, one of which is `id` which is marked as
`external` with `strawberry.federation.field(external=True)`. This tells
```

> federation that this field is not available in this service, and **that** it

Reviewer 4: Is this empasis on purpose? I'm not a native english speaker, so it seems off to me. But perhaps it's just me.
I would have expected the emphasize on the **and** instead.

Reviewer 3: No, you're definitely right. This emphasis is very strange

Reviewer 4: Had to google that, won't gonna lie

Reviewer 2: So did I and English is my first language 😅

Author: I've no idea why I put an emphasis there :D

comes from another service.

> The other field are `reviews` which results in a list of `Reviews` for this book
> and `reviews_count` which holds the number of reviews for this book.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The other fields are `reviews` (the list of `Reviews` for this book) and
`reviews_count` (the number of reviews for this book).
```

> Finally we also have a class method called `resolve_reference` that allows us to
> instantiate types when they are referred to from other services. The
> `resolve_reference` method is called when a GraphQL operation references an
> entity across multiple services. For example when doing this query:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Finally, we also have a class method, `resolve_reference`, that allows us to
instantiate types when they are referred to by other services. The
`resolve_reference` method is called when a GraphQL operation references an
entity across multiple services. For example, when making this query:
```

```graphql
{
  # query defined in the books service
  books {
    title
    # field defined in the reviews service
    reviews {
      body
    }
  }
}
```

The `resolve_reference` method is called with the `id` of the book for each book
returned by the books service. The `id` is the field that has been defined as

> the key for the `Book` type. In this example we are creating instance an instance

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the key for the `Book` type. In this example we are creating an instance
```

> The `resolve_reference` method is called with the `id` of the book for each book
> returned by the books service. The `id` is the field that has been defined as
> the key for the `Book` type. In this example we are creating instance an instance
> of `Book` with the requested id and a fixed number of reviews.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`resolve_reference` is called with the `id` of the book for each book returned
by the books service. Recall that above we defined the `id` field as the `key`
for the `Book` type. In this example we are creating an instance of `Book` with
the requested `id` and a fixed number of reviews.
```

> If we added more fields to book in a database this would be the place where we
> could query our database for the additional fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If we were to add more fields to `Book` that were stored in a database, this would
be where we could perform queries for these fields' values.
```

Reviewer 3: It's a bit unclear what "this" refers to in this sentence

> The last thing we need to do is to define a `Query` type, even if our service
> only has one type that is not used directly in any GraphQL query. This is
> because any GraphQL server requires the Query type to be defined.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The last thing we need to do is to define a `Query` type, even if our service
only has one type that is not used directly in any GraphQL query. This is
because the GraphQL spec mandates that a GraphQL server defines a Query type, even
if it ends up being empty/unused.
```

> In addition to that we also need to let Strawberry know about our Book and

Reviewer 3: Bit strange that we say "the last thing we need to do is ..." and then follow it up with another thing to do

> Review types. Since they are not being used anywhere, Strawberry won't be able

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Review types. Since they are not reachable from the `Query` field itself, Strawberry won't be able
```

to find them by default.

```python
@strawberry.type
class Query:
    _service: Optional[str]

schema = strawberry.federation.Schema(query=Query, types=[Book, Review])
```

## The gateway

Now we have our services up and running, we need to configure a gateway to
consume our services. Apollo Gateway is the official gateway server for Apollo
Federation. Here's an example on how to configure the gateway:

```js
const { ApolloServer } = require("apollo-server");
const { ApolloGateway } = require("@apollo/gateway");

const gateway = new ApolloGateway({
  serviceList: [
    { name: "books", url: "http://localhost:8000" },
    { name: "reviews", url: "http://localhost:8080" },
  ],
});

const server = new ApolloServer({ gateway });

server.listen().then(({ url }) => {
  console.log(`🚀 Server ready at ${url}`);
});
```

When running this example you'll be able to run query like the following:

```graphql
{
  books {
    id

>     reviews {

Reviewer 4: Should we add the `reviews_count` field to the query?

      body
    }
  }
}
```

> We have provided a full example that you can run and tweak to play with
> Strawberry and Federation, the repo is available here:
> https://github.com/strawberry-graphql/federation-demo

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have provided a full example that you can run and tweak to play with
Strawberry and Federation. The repo is available here:
https://github.com/strawberry-graphql/federation-demo
```
